.. _quickstart-label:

Quickstart (SiMFS-core)
=======================

Once you have your SiMFS-core installation in place, you can start producing
simulation data. This chapter will walk you through the process of simulating a
single diffusing fluorophore with cw-excitation.

.. note:: 

   This section will use the plain commandline interface of the SiMFS-core
   package. For more complex simulations the python driver pysimfs is
   recommended. Its usage is introduced in the tutorials section. This section
   will demo the fundamental building blocks of a SiMFS-Tk simulation pipeline.
   This is the most basic but also most flexible approach when working with
   SiMFS-Tk. If you are not comfortable with using the shell directly, you can
   skip this section and start with the tutorial, where this exact simulation
   and more complex cases will be addressed using the python interface.


   
Diffusion and component basics
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you want to use SiMFS-Tk from the commandline, make sure you have a basic
understanding of UNIX bash and the following commands: ``ls``, ``cd``, ``rm``,
``mkfifo``, ``ps`` and ``kill`` as well as the usage of ``stdin`` (``<``),
``stdout`` (``>``) redirection and command chaining with ``&&`` and ``&``. 

Prerequisites and setup
-----------------------

Create a working directory:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ mkdir SiMFS-quickstart
   $ cd SiMFS-quickstart

Make sure you can invoke SiMFS-Tk components from your working directory.


Working with parameters
-----------------------

First we want to generate a diffusion trajectory using ``simfs_dif``. The
diffusion trajectory is a random walk in three dimensions represented as
coordinates ``(x, y, z, t)``. Invoke ``simfs_dif`` with the ``list`` option to
dump a default set of parameters:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_dif list
     Using defaults only.
     {
         "collision_output": "__collisions__",
         "coordinate_output": "__coordinates__",
         "diffusion_coefficient": 1e-10,
         "experiment_time": 1.0,
         "half_height": 1e-06,
         "increment": 1e-07,
         "radius": 1e-06,
         "seed": 1480616706
     }
       
You should see a whole bunch of text printed to the screen. ``simfs_dif`` first
informs us about the fact that no parametrization was provided und only
defaults are used. The ``list`` option prevents it from doing anything else but
parse parameters and fill gaps with its default values. The paramters are
encoded as a ``json`` object. You can save the defaults by redirecting them to a file:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_dif list > dif.json


The ``dif.json`` file contains the default diffusion parameters.
``half_height`` and ``radius`` specify the size of the box in which the molcule
can diffuse, ``experiment_time`` is the length of the diffusion trajectory.
Together with the time ``increment`` it determines the number of coordinates
that will be generated. All units are SI base units (m, s, ...). 1 second
simulation time with a time increment of 100 ns produces 10 million individual
coordinates. The ``diffusion_coefficient`` determines the diffusion behaviour
(i.e. the step size in space) of the molecule. The two output parameters are
filenames that ``simfs_dif`` will write its result to. ``__coordinates__`` will
contain the 10 million coordinates after the run. We ignore the
``collision_output`` for now. 

We want to change the parameters to fit our needs. Open dif.json with your
favourite editor and change th values for the coordinate output to
``coords.dat`` and the collision output to ``/dev/null`` (we don't need it
now). We also change the diffusion coefficient to ``4.35e-10``, which is the
literature value for Alexa Fluor 488 in water in :math:`\frac{m^2}{s}`. Lastly
delete the line containing the seed parameter and the trailing comma above.
Save the file and feed it into ``simfs_dif`` again like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_dif list < dif.json
     {
         "collision_output": "/dev/null",
         "coordinate_output": "coords.dat",
         "diffusion_coefficient": 4.35e-10,
         "experiment_time": 1.0,
         "half_height": 1e-06,
         "increment": 1e-07,
         "radius": 1e-06,
         "seed": 1451956119
     }
  
The parameter dump reflects your changes. Note that if no seed is provided, a
new one will be created every time.

Running a component
-------------------

You are ready to start your first simulation run by ommiting the list option.
You can use the parameter output as a log file for your run by again
redirecting it to a new file.

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_dif < dif.json > dif.log.json

After a brief moment, the command returns and the directory should contain two
new files: 

.. code-block:: bash

   $ ls -l
     total 312512
     -rw-rw-rw- 1 tizi tizi 320000000 Mar  5 15:06 coords.dat
     -rw-rw-rw- 1 tizi tizi       217 Mar  5 15:01 dif.json
     -rw-rw-rw- 1 tizi tizi       241 Mar  5 15:06 dif.log.json

Inspecting results
------------------
   
The large ``coords.dat`` file contains the 10 million coordinates as binary
tuples of (x, y, z, t). To quickly inspect it, you can use the system tool
``od`` that displays binary data as text:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ od -t f8 -N 128 -w32 coords.dat
     0000000    8.521610130932819e-07  -4.0887056784284747e-07     8.16684813686339e-07                        0
     0000040    8.657852033462311e-07  -4.1840942341649523e-07    8.263125708566305e-07                    1e-07
     0000100    8.749074375681369e-07   -4.095287983491634e-07    8.275083766747386e-07                    2e-07
     0000140    8.822015070247384e-07   -4.162389674979344e-07    8.272075611332907e-07                    3e-07
     0000200

This shows you the first coordinates (``-N 128``) as 8-byte float values
(``-t f8``) in 32-byte chunks per row (``-w32``). The x, y and z values describe
the random walk in the box, while t increments in constants steps of 100 ns.


Evaluating focus functions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

We now have the position of the molecule as a function of time written to disk.
Next we need to find out the laser intensity and detection efficiency of at
each position. We use ``simfs_exi`` and ``simfs_det`` for this purpose. 

Excitation focus
----------------

Take a look at its default paramters:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_exi list
     Using defaults only.
     {
         "input": "__coordinates__",
         "output": "__focus__",
         "power": 1e-06,
         "shape": {
             "waist_x": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_y": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_z": 6.37e-07
         },
         "type": "3dGauss",
         "wavelength": 4.88e-07
     }

The component converts 4d coordinates from its inputs to pairs of time and
photon flux intensity at that position. The focus shape function is in this
case a 3d Gauss that is parametrized with 3 :math:`\frac{1}{e}` waists. The
power and wavelength in W and m are needed to determine the photon flux density
from this distribution. 
 
Save the parameters to ``exi.json`` and change the input file to our coordinate
file. Furthermore, rename the output to ``exciatation.dat`` and increase the
power to 10ÂµW. You can again check the file like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_exi list < fcs.json
     {
         "input": "coords.dat",
         "output": "excitation.dat",
         "power": 1e-05,
         "shape": {
             "waist_x": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_y": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_z": 6.37e-07
         },
         "type": "3dGauss",
         "wavelength": 4.88e-07
     }

You can now run the component in the same way as ``simfs_dif``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_exi < fcs.json > fcs.log.json

After the run, the file ``excitation.dat`` contains 10 million pairs of 8-byte
photon-flux, time values:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ od -t f8 -N 64 -w16 excitation.dat
    0000000         2876511477910.12                        0
    0000020        969522821513.2721                    1e-07
    0000040        729249356145.5566                    2e-07
    0000060        404358061321.1981                    3e-07
    0000100


Detection focus
---------------

``simfs_det`` produces detection efficiencies between 0 and 1 in the same way
that ``simfs_exi`` creates photon flux. For our purposes, we apply
``simfs_det`` to the same trajectory (``coords.dat``) without modifications.
The parameters in ``det.json`` should look like this:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_det list < det.json
     {
         "input": "coords.dat",
         "max_efficiency": 1.0,
         "output": "efficiency.dat",
         "shape": {
             "waist_x": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_y": 2.49e-07,
             "waist_z": 6.37e-07
         },
         "type": "3dGauss"
     }     

After running:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_det < det.json > det.log.json


You get a file with detection effciencies as a time series:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ od -t f8 -N 64 -w16 efficiency.dat
    0000000   1.1403589768728395e-14                        0
    0000020    3.843558634429651e-15                    1e-07
    0000040    2.891022879781843e-15                    2e-07
    0000060    1.603029741544923e-15                    3e-07
    0000100

We now have evaluated our two focus functions for excitation and detection for
our molecule.  Next up is the actual generation of photon events.


Photophysics
^^^^^^^^^^^^

The photophysics component ``simfs_ph2`` is the most complex part of SiMFS-Tk.
Its core responsibility is to simulate a generalized state diagram that is
tightly related to the Jablonkys diagram of a fluorophore. States like *S0*,
*S1* and *T1* are connected via transition rates, that determine the individual
life-times of a given state conversion. These rates may be constant or
dynamically updated from input data. There are multiple ways a transition graph
can interact with the outside world during the simulation.

Three state system
------------------

Consider a simple 3-state fluorophore
system:

.. image:: _static/EnergyDiagram.png

We have three states and four transitions (vibrational states and internal
conversion are ignored here). The blue rates (:math:`k_{ISC}` and
:math:`k_{rISC}`) are considered constant and can be specified by single rates.
The green rate :math:`k_{emi}` is the emission rate and also a constante.
However, this transition is special, as it produces photons. :math:`k_{exi}`
depends on the laser excitation. It can be computed as :math:`k_{exi} = \Phi
\cdot \sigma`, where :math:`\Phi` is the photon flux density of the laser
excitation in :math:`\frac{1}{m^2}` and :math:`\sigma` is the molecular
absorption crosssection that is proprtional to the molar absorption coefficient
:math:`\epsilon` in :math:`\frac{l}{mol\cdot cm}`

:math:`\Phi` is the actual quantity that we computed in ``excitation.dat``, so
this file will serve as the input for the excitation edge. With the time step
from the diffusion trajectory (100 ns), a rate will be computed from each input
flux, and a static simulation of the graph with fixed rates is preformed until
the next time step is reached. 

Parameter representation
------------------------

Translating this into parameters to
``simfs_ph2`` looks like this:

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "initial_state": "S0",
       "jablonsky": {
           "emi": {
               "from": "S1",
               "output": "emission.dat",
               "rate": 1e+8,
               "to": "S0"
           },
           "exi": {
               "from": "S0",
               "rate": {
                   "input": "excitation.dat",
                   "epsilon": 73000
               },
               "to": "S1",
           },
           "isc": {
               "from": "S1",
               "rate": 1e+6,
               "to": "T1"
           },
           "risc": {
               "from": "T1",
               "rate": 1e+6,
               "to": "S0"
           }
       }
   }

Each object within the ``jablonsky`` object represents an edge in the
transition graph. Each has at least a ``from``, ``to`` and ``rate`` field
specified. ``isc`` and ``risc`` have a constants rates set to 1 MHz. In addtion
``emi`` is parametrized to write a timetag to the output ``emission.dat``
whenever it is traversed. Note that you can add outputs to any edge you are
interested in. The ``exi`` edge has a special dynamic rate parameter: It reads
flux values from the input ``excitation.dat`` and calculates its rate according
to the ``epsilon`` value.

Note the the names of the edges and nodes can be freely defined by the user.
Nodes are implicitely added if they appear as ``from`` or ``to`` in at least
one transition. Furthermore, a node without an outgoing transition is a dead
end and terminates the simulation preemptively.

Run the simulation with the given parameters in ``ph2.json``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ simfs_ph2 < ph2.json > ph2.log.json

As a result you get your emission file that contains photon arrival times:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ od -t f8 -N 64 -w8 emission.dat
     0000000    0.0009079984765546347
     0000010    0.0009152793599941517
     0000020    0.0009257110802838159
     0000030     0.000943526107273474
     0000040    0.0009598299824447027
     0000050    0.0009761390643363464
     0000060    0.0009989992608058992
     0000070    0.0010024525289886105
     0000100

You made it! These are simulated photon times that include diffusion dynamics
through a Gauss shaped laser focus and actual photon statistics with blinking
and antibunching.


Detection and photon handling 
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

You may have noticed that we haven't used ``efficiency.dat`` so far. That is
because we only simulated up until the moment of photon emission from the
fluorophore and collected every single photon. In a real experiment, the
detection of a photon depends on the laser focus. In SiMFS-Tk excitation and
laser focus are independent objects that are handled in two subsequent steps.
We have already produced a time series of derection efficincies for our
diffusion trajectory according to our detection focus function. We use
``simfs_spl`` to split the raw photon events into actually detected photons and
lost photons based on the detection efficiency data. The parameters look like this:

.. code-block:: json

   {
       "accepted_output": "detected.dat",
       "efficiency_input": "efficiency.dat",
       "photon_input": "emission.dat",
       "rejected_output": "/dev/null"
   }

We select photons from the raw emission, decide to keep or to drop it according
to the current detection efficiency and write the result to ``detected.dat``.
Rejected photons are discarded to ``/dev/null``.

As a result you get the file ``detected.dat`` which is a subset of
``emission.dat``:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ wc -c emission.dat detected.dat
     598888 SiMFS-quickstart/emission.dat
     202832 SiMFS-quickstart/detected.dat
     801720 total

You see, that with the current parameters, about two thirds of photons are
dropped in the detection step.

Next steps
----------

Since the final result is a stream of binary 64-bit floating point time values,
it is straight forward to feed it into your analysis procedure of choice.
Timetrace binning and correlation analysis provide insight into the diffusion
behaviour and its interaction with different focus shapes, as well as the rate
fast photophysical dynamics represented by more complex rate graphs. 

Most of the components introduced here have more features available. Especially
the capabilities of ``simfs_ph2`` to react to environmental inputs can increase
the complexity ot the photophysics simulation a lot. Combining this with
differnt focus shapes for ``simfs_exi`` and ``simfs_det``, multiple excitation
lines and pulse patterns opens a much wider field of simulation tasks. See the
component documentation and the examples in the tutorials section for more
info.
